.TH SCHED
\"
\" sched manual page version 1.0 released 7/4/92.
\"
.UC 4
.SH NAME
sched \- Address-trace Scheduler, version I
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sched
-p'trace_gen' -m num_events -q quantum [-c] [-r] [-f] [-v]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I sched
generates an output trace which is an interleaving of blocks of memory
references for trace-driven cache/TLB/memory simulators.  A
.I trace
is a finite sequence of memory references usually obtained by the
interpretive execution of a program or set of programs.  A
.I block
is a segment of a full trace.  From one to eight input traces can be
combined to generate an output trace that resembles a multiprogramming
workload.  The scheduling policy is round-robin over the (circular)
list given by the order in which the
.I -p
clauses appear in the command line.
.PP
Trace input is read by
.I sched
in 
.I din
format (described later).
.I sched
parameters, e.g. number of events, are set
with command line options (also described later).
.PP
.I sched
reads access records in
.I din
format from the output of the unix commands given by the
.I trace_gen
clauses.  A
.I din 
record is pair
.I label
.IR address .
Each line of the trace file must contain one 
.I din
record.
The rest of the line is ignored so that comments can be included
in the trace file.
.PP
The
.I label
gives the access type of a reference.
.br

    0  read data.
    1  write data.
    2  instruction fetch.
    3  escape record (treated as unknown access type).
    4  escape record (causes cache/tlb flush).
.PP
The
.I address
is a hexadecimal byte-address between 0 and ffffffff inclusively (without
any prefix such as 0x).
.PP
.I sched
parameters are set by command line options.
At least one and at most eight
.I trace_gen
clauses must be specified.
Other parameters are optional.
The suffixes
.IR K ,
.I M
and
.I G
multiply numbers by 1024, 1024^2 and 1024^3, respectively.
.PP
The following command line options are available:
.TP
.BI \-p " trace_gen"
.I trace_gen
must be a unix command that generates a trace in the format described
above.  Minimum of one and maximum of eight -p clauses.  For example:
.br
    sched -p'zcat trace1.Z' -p'cat trace2'
.br
would generate an interleaving of blocks of
.I quantum
accesses from trace1, followed by
.I quantum
accesses from trace2, then back to trace1 and so on.
Each
.I trace_gen
must be enclosed in single quotes (to protect it from
the shell) and must not exceed 80 characters.
.TP
.BI \-m " num_events"
sets the number of accesses that will be generated i.e. the size of the
output trace.  Defaults to 500x10^6 (i.e. -m500000000).
.TP
.BI \-q " quantum"
sets the number of accesses to be transferred from one of the input
traces to the output trace, before selecting another source of input
(rescheduling the execution of the processes).
Defaults to 10^5 (i.e. -q100000).
.TP
.BI \-c " flag_context_switches"
if this option is present, a
.I context_switch
record is inserted in the output trace to signal a rescheduling.
The record inserted conforms to the
.I din
format (accepted by dinero and tlb) and is
.br
    5 pid
.br
where the address field is the new process-id number (in the range 0-7).
Defaults to not-flagging context switches.
.TP
.BI \-r " resched_on_EOT"
if present, when a trace runs out, re-open the pipe but take input from
the next trace in the scheduling list.  If not present, the pipe is
re-open and input taken from the beginning of the same trace/process.
.TP
.BI \-f " flush_on_CS"
if this option is present, a
.I flush_record
is added to the output stream on a context switch.  If option
.I flag_context_switches
is also used, the
.I flush_record
is issued immediately after the
.I context_switch
record.
.TP
.BI \-v " variable_quantum"
if this option is present, the
.I quantum
changes dynamically according to
.br
(0.75 * quantum) + (rand() % (0.5 * quantum))).
.SH FILES
.ta 1.5i
.I doc.h
contains additional programmer documentation.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
dinero(1), dinero(1), tlb(1).
.SH BUGS
Not all combination of options have been thoroughly tested.
.br
The number of accesses in a given block can be at times (quantum + 1)
rather than just quantum.
.br
If the pipe associated to a command specified by an -p clause is
successfully open but the command at the other end of the pipe misbehaves,
sched may or may not give a warning and/or die miserably.
.SH AUTHOR
.nf
Roberto Hexsel,
Dept. of Computer Science,
Edinburgh University
.fi

