.TH TLB
\"
\" tlb man page version 1.0 released 10/4/92.
\"
.UC 4
.SH NAME
tlb \- Translation Lookaside Buffer simulator, version I
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tlb
-p page_size -s size -a associativity -Ooutfilename [ other_options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I tlb
is a trace-driven TLB simulator.
Simulation results are determined by the input trace and the TLB parameters.
A trace is a finite sequence of memory references
usually obtained by the interpretive execution of a program or set of programs.
Trace input is read by the simulator
in 
.I din
format (described later).
TLB parameters, e.g. size and associativity, are set with
command line options (also described later).
.I tlb
uses the priority stack
method of memory hierarchy (of the Dinero cache simulator) simulation to
increase flexibility
and improve simulator performance in highly associative TLBs.
This version of
.I tlb
does not permit the simultaneous simulation of multiple alternative TLBs.
.PP
Trace-driven simulation is frequently used to evaluate memory hierarchy
performance.  These simulations are repeatable and allow design parameters
to be varied so that effects can be isolated.
They are cheaper than hardware monitoring and do not
require access to or the existence of the machine being studied.
Simulation results can be obtained in many situations where analytic model
solutions are intractable without questionable simplifying assumptions.
Workloads in trace-driven simulation
are represented by samples of real workloads and contain complex
embedded correlations that synthetic workloads often lack.
Lastly, a trace-driven simulation is guaranteed to be
representative of at least one program in execution.
.PP
.I tlb
reads trace input in
.I din
format from
.IR stdin .
A
.I din 
record is two-tuple
.I label
.IR address .
Each line of the trace file must contain one 
.I din
record.
The rest of the line is ignored so that comments can be included
in the trace file.
.PP
The
.I label
gives the access type of a reference.
.br

    0  read data.
    1  write data.
    2  instruction fetch.
    3  escape record (treated as unknown access type).
    4  escape record (causes tlb flush).
    5  context switch (address field is the new pid number).
.PP
The
.I address
is a hexadecimal byte-address between 0 and ffffffff inclusively (without
any prefix such as 0x).
The process identification number is part of the tags stored in the
associative memory.
When presented with an input record of types 0, 1, or 2,
.I tlb
compares both the address and the current pid to the tag(s) stored in
the appropriate block(s).  Process Identification Numbers must be in the
range 0-7.
.PP
The page table is constructed on the fly by the tlb simulator.  The first
page that faults is allocated main memory frame 0; all subsequent faults
result in allocation of consecutivelly numbered frames.  No frame
replacement algorithm is implemented.  The bus traffic caused by
tlb activities is not generated either.
.PP
TLB parameters are set by command line options.
Parameter
.I page_size
must be specified.
Other parameters are optional.
The suffixes
.IR K ,
.I M
and
.I G
multiply numbers by 1024, 1024^2 and 1024^3, respectively.
.PP
The following command line options are available:
.TP
.BI \-p " page_size"
sets page size in bytes.   Both the virtual and real memory page/frame
sizes are specified by this option.  Must be explicitly set (e.g. -p8K).
.TP
.BI \-s " size"
sets the number of entries, or mappings, in the TLB(e.g. -s64).
Defaults to 1 (i.e. -s1).
.TP
.BI \-a " associativity"
sets the tlb associativity.  
Defaults to one-way associativity (i.e. -a1).
.TP
.BI \-r " replacement_policy"
sets the tlb replacement policy.
Valid replacement policies are
.I l
(LRU), 
.I f
(FIFO),
and 
.I r
(RANDOM).
Defaults to LRU (i.e. -rl).
.TP
.BI \-D " debug_flag"
used by implementor to debug simulator.
.br
A debug_flag of
.I 0 
disables debugging;
.br
.I 1
prints the (decoded) address reference, the contents of the page-table (as it
would appear in main memory) plus the priority stacks after every reference;
.br
.I 2
in addition to the above, prints the performance metrics after every
reference.
.br
Debugging information may be useful to the user to 
understand the precise meaning of all tlb parameter settings.
Defaults to no-debug (i.e. -D0).
.TP
.BI \-o " output_style"
sets the output style.
.br
Terse-output (\fI0\fR)
prints results only at the end of the simulation run.
.br
Verbose-output (\fI1\fR)
prints results every half-million references and
at the end of the simulation run.
.br
Bus-output (\fI2\fR)
prints an output record for every memory bus transfer.
.br
Bus-transparent-output (\fI3\fR)
prints an output record for every memory bus transfer in the same format
as the input format.  The label field is unchanged but the address field is
modified to reflect the corresponding virtual-to-real mapping.  This
option (\fI-o3\fR) should be used only when
.I tlb
is an intermediary stage of a pipeline, where its output is being
piped into another program.  In this case, the option
.I -Ooutfile
MUST be used to stop the statistics from appearing at the output stream.
The option (\fI-o4\fR) is equivalent do (\fI-o4\fR) and is provided for
compatibility with 
.I dinero.
Defaults to Terse-output (i.e. -o0).
For Bus-output (-o2), each bus record is a triple:
.br

.I BUS2 
are four literal characters to start bus record.
.br
.I access
is the access type (
.I r
for a bus-read,
.I w
for a bus-write).
.br
.I address
is an hexadecimal byte-address between 0 and ffffffff inclusively.
.TP
.BI \-Z " skip_count"
sets the number of trace references to be skipped before beginning
simulation.  Defaults to none (i.e. -Z0).
.TP
.BI \-z " maximum_count"
sets the maximum number of trace references to be processed 
after skipping the trace references specified by 
.I skip_count .
Defaults to 200 million (i.e. -z200000000).
.TP
.BI \-Q " flush_count"
sets the number of references between TLB flushes. 
Can be used to crudely simulate multiprogramming.
Defaults to no flushing (i.e. -Q0).
.TP
.BI \-O " outfile"
the statistics are written to
.I outfile
rather than to sdtout.  outfile can be at most 80 characteres long.
Should always be used when piping
.I tlb
output into another program (with options -o2, -o3 or -o4).
Bus activity (i.e. -o2, -o3, -o4) is always sent to stdout.
.SH FILES
.ta 1.5i
.I doc.h
contains additional programmer documentation.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
dinero(1), dinero(1), sched(1).
.SH BUGS
Not all combination of options have been thoroughly tested.
.br
The size of the page table (and physical memory) can/does grow arbitrarily
large since no frame-replacement algorithm is implemented.
.SH AUTHOR
tlb was adapted by Roberto Hexsel, Dept. of Computer Science,
Edinburgh University,
from DineroIII Cache Simulator (v. 3.1, rel. 8/7/85),
developed by Mark D. Hill, Computer Sciences Dept., Univ. of Wisconsin.
.fi

